---
layout: post
title:  "Strategic Honesty"
date:   2022-03-14 16:45:30 +0000
categories: strategy
---
# Strategy #


Crafting an effective strategy requires intellectual honesty when assessing the current situation.

I have read a couple of books recently where the topic of understanding the current situation is discussed as a critical stage in the crafting of an effective strategy. Clausewitz says you need to ‘gauge the other to a large extent by what he says and does, instead of of judging him by what he, strictly speaking, ought to be or do’. H.R. McMaster warns of ‘strategic narcissism’ where policy makers project onto an enemy, the one they want to deal with, rather than use ‘strategic empathy’, where you seek to truly understand the enemy and his/her motivations and objectives - working with reality not wishful thinking.

It seems to me that this problem is one of the root causes of many of the geopolitical difficulties we face at present. A belligerent Putin in Russia annexing Crimea, the Taliban in Afghanistan still linked with Al Qaeda and other groups. The behaviour of China to neighbours in the South China Sea, cyber attacks to secure intellectual property and the lack of distinction between the state and enterprise. Wishing situations were different and projecting our own values onto them, does not make it so.

So what can we do? Firstly, we need to objectively and dispassionately assess the current situation. This means not assuming that the other party has the same values, history, objectives or rationality. We need to judge based on reality and use that as a basis for our strategy and defence posture.

In our assessment of corporate strategies, we assess the attractiveness of the industry and the opportunity for competitive advantage, whilst avoiding overconfidence or recklessness. 
